      Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
      Round 2, December 3rd 2022                                                                        Editorial


Editorial
Tasks, test data and solutions were prepared by: Vito Anić, Marin Kišić, Dorijan Lendvaj, Martina Licul,
Bartol Markovinović, and Patrik Pavić.
Implementation examples are given in attached source code files.

Task Tramvaji
Prepared by: Vito Anić
Necessary skills: arrays, finding minimum
Let us calculate the time it is required to go from station 1 to station x. Let us store those values in the
array a. Obviously, from station 1 to station 1 we need 0 minutes. For any other station x > 1:

   • If the information about the station is Patrik ti , then ax = tx

   • If the information about the station is Josip y ti , then ax = ay + tx (the time it took from 1 to y
     plus the time it took from y to x)

This will help us in finding the shortest ride. The shortest ride will always be on adjacent stations, so the
indices will be x and x + 1. For some station x, the time it is required to go from x to x + 1 is ax+1 − ax
(if we subtract the time it took from 1 to x, from the time it took from 1 to x + 1, we will get the time it
took from x to x + 1), now we just need to go through the sequence and find the x for which that time is
the smallest.

Task Ekspert
Prepared by: Marin Kišić i Martina Licul
Necessary skills: mathematics, bitwise operations
Suppose y < x. The product x · y can be represented as the sum of at most log2 y numbers. We can do
that in the following way:
x·y =     2 · x for each i where the i-th position in the binary representation of y is 1.
       P i

For example: 14 · 13 = 20 · 14 + 22 · 14 + 23 · 14
Such a solution uses at most 2 log2 y operations: log2 y for storing the result in a register, and log2 y for
auxiliary operations.
For implementation details, consult the official solution.

Task Lampice
Prepared by: Dorijan Lendvaj i Patrik Pavić
Necessary skills: xor hashing
For the first subtask, let’s look at rectangles which contain the point (0, 0) and the ones that don’t
separately.
If the rectangle contains the point (0, 0), then it must also contain all points (x2 , y2 ), and for it to have an
area different from 0 it must also contain the point (1, 1). If it has a width of x a height of y, we get that
for all points (x2 , y2 ) x ≥ x2 and y ≥ y2 . We also know x ≤ n and y ≤ m, so if we add 1 to x2 and y2 we
get the condition max(x2 ) ≤ x ≤ n and max(y2 ) ≤ y ≤ m, so we have n + 1 − max(x2 ) possibilities for x
and m + 1 − max(y2 ) possibilities for y, which is in total (n + 1 − max(x2 ))(m + 1 − max(y2 )) possible
rectangles.


                                                     1 od 3
      Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
      Round 2, December 3rd 2022                                                                         Editorial


If the rectangle doesn’t contain the point (0, 0), then it can’t contain any other point (x2 , y2 ), so our goal is
to find the number of rectangles without any of the chosen points. If we fix the lower row of the rectangle,
then for each column we can calculate the maximum height of a rectangle in that column(i.e. how far
up can we go without reaching a lamp). If we fix the leftmost column that has the lowest maximum
height(let’s call it i), we can calculate the number of such rectangles by finding the rightmost column left
of i which has a lower or equal maximum height(let’s call it l; let it be −1 if there is no such column)
and the leftmost column right of i which has a lower maximum height(let’s call it r; let it be m + 1 if
there is no such column), then we know that the height must be between 1 and the maximum height for
column i(let’s call it h), that the leftmost column of the rectangle is between l + 1 and i and that the
rightmost column of the rectangle is between i and r − 1. So, for the leftmost column we have i − l options,
for the rightmost column we have r − i options, but we must subtract the option that the rectangle has
a width of 0, for the height we have h options, so the number of rectangles that we’re looking for is
h((i − l)(r − i) − 1). Quickly calculating l and r for each i is a well known problem that can be solved
using a stack, and h can quickly be calculated for each i if we know what its value was for the last row, so
the time complexity ends up being O(nm + k).
For the second subtask, we can just check all rectangles and for each color of lamps see if the condition is
fulfilled or not, which works in a time complexity of O(k(nm)2 ).
For the third subtask, let’s uniformly randomly generate an 60-bit number for each color of lamps where
all of the generated numbers are independent, and let’s give each lamp the value equal to the number
generated for its color. If we look at the xor of the values of all the lamps in a rectangle, for each color,
if both lamps of that color are in the rectangle, then, since x xor x = 0, that color won’t contribute to
the xor, and that’s also obviously true for colors that aren’t included in the rectangle. Therefore, if for
each color either both lamps of that color are in the rectangle or both aren’t, then the xor of all values
in that rectangle will be 0. If it’s not, then for each color which has exactly 1 lamp of its color in the
rectangle the value is xored with a uniformly randomly distributed number between 0 and 260 − 1; the
result of that is another uniformly randomly distributed number between 0 and 260 − 1, so the probability
that the xor ends up being 0 is 2160 . Since there are n(n+1)m(m+1)
                                                             4        rectangles in total, the probability of
this solution saying that a rectangle is good even though it isn’t is at most n(n+1)m(m+1)
                                                                                    262      , which is small
enough. The xor of all values in the rectangle can easily be calculated using prefix sums, which gives us a
complexity of O((nm)2 + k).
For the fourth subtask, if we fix the leftmost and rightmost column of the rectangle(let’s call them l and
r), our goal is to find the number of rectangles with xor 0 with their leftmost column being l and their
rightmost column being r. If we say that ai is equal to the xor of all values in the i-th row and the l-th to
r-th column, our goal is to find the number of subarrays of ai whose xor is 0 and whose length is at least
2(the second condition can be solved by erasing subarrays of size 1, so we’ll ignore them from now on).
Let pi = xor(a0..i−1 ). Then xor(al..r ) = pl xor pr+1 , so we’re looking for the number of pairs in the array
p whose xor is 0, so we’re looking for the number of pairs of equal elements in the array p, which can
easily be solved in O(m log m). The total time complexity is O(n2 m log m).

Task Prijateljice
Prepared by: Marin Kišić
Necesssary skills: game theory, dynamic programming
Note that if both Leona and Zoe for each letter of the alphabet have at least one word beginning with
that letter, then the winner is the player which has the lexicographically greatest word.
That leads us to the following question: what happens if both have words that begins with the first x
letters of the alphabet, but only one of them have a word beginning with the x + 1-th letter?
Without loss of generality, suppose Leona has a word beginning with the x + 1-th letter. Note that if
Leona has the lexicographically greatest word beginning with one of the first x letters, then she is the
winner. But if Zoe has such a word, then the game continues.


                                                     2 od 3
      Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
      Round 2, December 3rd 2022                                                                    Editorial


Now, we can conclude the winner is determined by the first letter which a player doesn’t have a word
beginning with, and the other player has the lexicographically greatest word among all the words beginning
with the letters before that letter.
Alternatively, the task can be solved with dynamic programming. This is left as an exercise for the reader.

Task Kruhologija
Prepared by: Patrik Pavić
Necessary skills: dfs, basic topology
We can use the Euler characteristic of the surface, mainly V − E + F = 2 − 2g where g is the number of
holes. Now we have to count V , E and F . To count F we can simply do a dfs on the faces, marking each
face we visit. The number of visited nodes is exactly F . Because each face has degree exactly 4, by the
handshaking lemma E = 2F .
The trickiest part is counting the vertices. For each face you can actually calculate the degrees of the four
vertices forming the side. Let’s say you are trying to calculate the degree of the left vertex of the edge you
are pointing at. You can mark the current face and start a "left cycle" until you return to the marked face.
The number of faces you visit is exactly the degree of the vertex, you can easily see this by "flattening"
out the part around that vertex, it essentially looks like a flower with either 3, 4 or 5 petals. Now you can
easily infer the total number of vertices and then the total number of holes!




                                                   3 od 3
