                                                                                                Day 2
                                                                                          Task: trade
                                                                                        Language: en


Tricks of the Trade (trade)

Since your career as an art thief turned out to be decidedly less glamorous than you had hoped for,
you have set your eyes on a new target: you want to steal a medal at this year’s ceoi!* So far your evil
plan is working as intended: The Scientific Committee, still confused about the oil shortage you had
arranged, immediately fell for your feigned hacking attempt. And when they let you into their secret
headquarters to help plan the rejudging, you could easily steal the combination for the safe in which
the medals are stored…
However, the next phase of your plan will require an assistant, and right now you don’t have enough
money to hire one. Fortunately, you just found an opportunity to fix this problem. A shop you stumbled
upon in Berlin sells 𝑁 programmable vacuum cleaner robots, numbered from 1 to 𝑁. Robot 𝑖 costs 𝑐𝑖
euros. Unfortunately, the vendor will only sell you a full, contiguous segment of robots: If you want to
buy robots 𝑖 and 𝑗, then you must buy every robot 𝑘 with 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑗.
As your fellow contestants are quite fond of robots, you promised to sell them 𝐾 of these robots
(1 ≤ 𝐾 ≤ 𝑁). They will pay you 𝑠𝑖 euros for robot 𝑖, and you hope to make a good profit in the process.
Write a program that
         computes the maximum profit you can make by buying a segment of at least 𝐾 robots and
         selling exactly 𝐾 robots of this segment to the other contestants, and
         determines which robots you might sell to the other contestants as part of such a transaction
         with maximum profit.†


Input

The first line of input contains the numbers 𝑁 and 𝐾 as described above. The second line contains the
𝑁 integers 𝑐1 , … , 𝑐𝑁 . Finally, the third line contains the 𝑁 integers 𝑠1 , … , 𝑠𝑁 .


Output

Your program should output two lines. The first line should contain a single integer, the maximum
profit you can achieve. On the second line, you should output a binary string of length 𝑁: the 𝑖-th
character should be 1 if you might sell the 𝑖-th robot in some transaction with maximum profit and 0
otherwise.


Constraints and grading

We always have 1 ≤ 𝑁 ≤ 250 000 and 1 ≤ 𝑐𝑖 , 𝑠𝑖 ≤ 109 .
Subtask 1 (5 + 5 points). 𝑁 ≤ 200
Subtask 2 (5 + 5 points). 𝑁 ≤ 6 000
Subtask 3 (5 + 5 points). 𝐾 = 2
Subtask 4 (10 + 15 points). 𝐾 ≤ 200
Subtask 5 (25 + 20 points). No further constraints

* Obviously, the problem was with the art, not the thefts.
†
    After all, you might find some use for robots that you keep…



                                                             1/2
                                                                                                  Day 2
                                                                                            Task: trade
                                                                                          Language: en


Partial scoring. In all subtasks, you can obtain partial scores as indicated in the brackets:
      The first number represents the number of points awarded if your program computes the
      maximum profit correctly.
      The second number represents the number of additional points awarded if your program
      computes the entire output correctly.


Examples

              Input                                  Output

 5 3                                   -1
 3 5 2 3 6                             00111
 2 1 5 2 3

 5 2                                   2
 1 6 1 5 2                             10111
 4 1 6 2 4


In the first example, you can buy the third to fifth robot and sell all three of them to your fellow
contestants. This costs you 2 + 3 + 6 = 11 euros, while the contestants will only pay you 5 + 2 + 3 = 10
euros for these robots, so you lose 1 euro. If you buy any other segment of robots, you would lose
even more money.
In the second example, you can buy the first to third robot and sell the first and third robot to your
fellow contestants. This costs you 8 euros, while the contestants will pay you 10 euros, so your profit
is 2 euros. No other segment of robots would give you a higher profit. However, you could also buy
the third and fourth robot, and sell both of them, or buy the third to fifth robot, and sell the third and
fifth robot. In both cases, your profit would also be 2 euros, and so all robots except for the second
robot can be part of a transaction with maximum profit.


Limits

Time: 7 s
Memory: 2048 MiB




                                                   2/2
