                                                                                                            Day 2
                                                                                                  Task: incursion
                                                                                                    Language: en


The Ties That Guide Us (incursion)

Now that you have hired an assistant using the profits from your robot sales, you are finally ready to
go for the safe that contains the ceoi medals!
The safe is located in a university building that consists of 𝑁 rooms with 𝑁 − 1 doors connecting them.
Every room can be reached from any other, and each room has at most 3 doors. Both you and your
assistant have a floor plan of the building—but unfortunately in two different editions: While both
plans describe the same layout, the numbering of the rooms and doors might differ.
During the second competition day, the committee will be busy handling clarification requests. This is
the perfect opportunity to get to the safe with the medals.
In the beginning, your assistant will search the building. Once he has found the room with the
safe, he will guide you to it.* As you are not allowed to bring your phone to the competition venue,
your assistant leaves behind secret signs in the university rooms. For this, he uses the virtually
infinite supply of ties left over from last year’s boi. Because these ties are indistinguishable, the only
information you will get is the number of ties left behind by your assistant in any given room. As too
many ties in one place might look suspicious, the maximum number of ties in any individual room
should be as small as possible (see the grading section below).
Later, you will sneak out during a toilet break and use the ties left behind to find the room with the
safe. Beware that the safe will of course be hidden, so you will not be able to recognize it just by
entering the room and instead will have to rely on the ties you’ve found. Moreover, as your absence
must not be noticed, you have to find the safe quickly: you should pass through at most 𝑑 + 30 doors,
where 𝑑 is the number of doors on the direct path from your starting position to the room with the
safe. If you pass through a door multiple times, each pass counts.
Write a program that
       tells your assistant how many ties to leave behind in each room, and
       guides you to the room with the safe afterwards.


Communication

This is a communication task in which your program is run twice for each testcase. You must implement
the following two functions:
       vector⟨int⟩ mark(vector⟨pair⟨int, int⟩⟩ 𝐹, int safe) where
             𝐹 describes the floor plan by specifying the doors: 𝐹 contains 𝑁 − 1 pairs (𝑢, 𝑣) with
             1 ≤ 𝑢, 𝑣 ≤ 𝑁 and 𝑢 ≠ 𝑣, which means that there is a door between rooms 𝑢 and 𝑣;
             safe is the room with the safe.
       Your function should return a vector 𝑇 that consists of 𝑁 integers 𝑇[0], … , 𝑇[𝑁 − 1] with 0 ≤ 𝑇[𝑖] ≤
       109 : 𝑇[𝑖] is the number of ties your assistant leaves behind in room 𝑖 + 1. The numbers 𝑇[𝑖]
       should be as small as possible.
       void locate(vector⟨pair⟨int, int⟩⟩ 𝐹, int curr, int 𝑡) where 𝐹 describes the same floor plan (but
       possibly with a different numbering of the rooms and a different ordering of the doors!), curr is
       the room you are currently in, and 𝑡 is the number of ties you found there.
       Inside this function you can call the grader function int visit(int 𝑣) in order to move from your
       current room to room 𝑣 (according to the room numbering in your version of the floor plan,
* After all, you want to open the safe yourself—it would be no fun to have someone else open it and hand you the medal
  after the competition!



                                                        1/4
                                                                                                 Day 2
                                                                                       Task: incursion
                                                                                         Language: en


      1 ≤ 𝑣 ≤ 𝑁); this function returns the number of ties your assistant left behind in room 𝑣. There
      must be a door connecting room 𝑣 to your current room, and you can only call this function a
      limited number of times per testcase (see above).
      When your function locate returns, you have to be in the room with the safe.
For each testcase, in the first run the function mark is called, while in the second run locate is called.
If you call visit too often, with invalid parameters, or during the first run of your program, your
submission will be immediately terminated and judged as Not correct for the corresponding testcase.
You must not write to standard output or read from standard input; otherwise, you may receive the
verdict Security violation!. You are however free to write to the standard error stream (stderr).
You must include the file incursion.h in your source code. To test your program locally, you can
link it with sample_grader.cpp which can be found in the attachment for this task in cms. See
below for a description of the sample grader, and see sample_grader.cpp for instructions on how
to run it with your program. Beware that for simplicity this sample grader does not run your program
twice, but instead calls both mark and locate (exactly once) as part of a single run. The attachment
also contains a sample implementation as incursion_sample.cpp.


Constraints and grading

We always have 2 ≤ 𝑁 ≤ 45 000.
Subtask 1 (30 points). There is no room with 3 doors.
Subtask 2 (30 points). There is precisely one room with 2 doors.
Subtask 3 (40 points). No further constraints.
Partial scoring. In all subtasks, your actual score depends on the maximum number 𝑇max of ties left
behind by your assistant in a room (i.e. the largest number 𝑇[𝑖] in the return value of mark) according
to the following table:
                                      𝑇max    [0, 1]     2      [3, 109 ]
                                     score    100%      40%      30%



Example interaction

Consider a testcase with 𝑁 = 3 and the following floor plan:



                                                         3/1
                                        2/3


                                                  1/2



The first number in each room refers to your assistant’s numbering and the second one to your own
numbering. The safe is located in the large room at the bottom (shaded in yellow) while your starting
location is in the upper right room (drawn with a bold outline).




                                                  2/4
                                                                                                    Day 2
                                                                                          Task: incursion
                                                                                            Language: en


In the first run of your program, the grader calls your function mark as mark({{1, 2}, {2, 3}}, 1). Assume
this returns {2, 2, 0}, i.e. your assistant leaves behind two ties in rooms 1 and 2 each, but no tie in
room 3.
In the second run of your program, the grader calls your function locate as locate({{1, 3}, {2, 3}}, 1, 0).
Then, an interaction between your program and the grader could look as follows:

     Your program                Return value                             Explanation
 visit(3)                                             you visit room 3 in your numbering
                             2                        this is room 2 in your assistant’s numbering, in
                                                         which he left behind two ties
 visit(1)                                             (re)visit your room 1…
                             0                        … corresponding to your assistant’s room 3,
                                                         which contains no ties
 visit(3)                                             (re)visit your room 3…
                             2                        … which still has two ties
 visit(2)                                             visit your room 2…
                             2                        … corresponding to your assistant’s room 1, with
                                                         two ties
 return                                               you are sure that room 2 contains the safe
                                                      as this corresponds to room 1 in your assistant’s
                                                         numbering, your program is judged correct
Here you passed through four doors, while the number 𝑑 of doors on the direct path from your starting
location to the room with the safe is two.
This interaction is reproduced by incursion_sample.cpp on the public testcase.


Grader

The sample grader first expects on standard input the integers 𝑁 and safe. Afterwards, it expects the
floor plan 𝐹 as a sequence of 𝑁 − 1 pairs of integers 1 ≤ 𝑢, 𝑣 ≤ 𝑁 (𝑢 ≠ 𝑣).
It will then call mark(𝐹, safe) and write its return value 𝑇 to standard output. After this, it expects
your starting location curr and will call locate(𝐹, curr, 𝑇[curr − 1]); note that the sample grader will not
change the numbering of rooms and doors. It will then write to standard output a protocol of all calls
to visit by your program.
Upon termination, the sample grader writes one of the following messages to standard output:
Invalid input. The input to the grader via standard input was not of the above form.
Invalid call to visit. You called visit from mark or with an invalid parameter.
Invalid return value of mark. The call to mark did not return a vector 𝑇 of length 𝑁 or at least one of
       the values 𝑇[𝑖] was either negative or larger than 109 .
Correct: at most Tmax tie(s) per room. The function locate returned while in room safe, and the largest
      value in 𝑇 is 𝑇max .
Not correct: current position is curr. The function locate returned while in room curr ≠ safe.
In contrast, the grader actually used to judge your program will only output Not correct (for any of the
above errors), Security violation!, Partially correct, or Correct. Moreover, the grader is adaptive, i.e. its
behavior may depend on the actions of your program in the current as well as in earlier runs. Both the
sample grader and the grader used to judge your program will terminate your program automatically
whenever one of the above errors occurs.



                                                    3/4
                                                                                             Day 2
                                                                                   Task: incursion
                                                                                     Language: en


Limits

Time: 0.5 s
Memory: 512 MiB
For every testcase, the above time and memory limit will be enforced for each of the two runs of your
program separately.




                                                4/4
