      Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
      Round 3, January 14th 2023                                                                   Editorial


Editorial
Tasks, test data and solutions were prepared by: Vito Anić, Josip Klepec, Dorijan Lendvaj, Martina Licul,
Patrick Pavić, and Petar Sruk.
Implementation examples are given in attached source code files.

Task Estimathon
Prepared by: Vito Anić
Necessary skills: arrays, for loop, if statement
First, if n < m, the answer is NE. Why? Because for each table we need to use chairs of the same color.
Therefore, we can use n different chair colors at most. Domagoj wants us to use every chair color. If n < m
that is impossible.
If we have less than 4 chairs of the same color the answer is also NE. Why? Let us look at these two cases:
We do not use that color (Domagoj is sad), we pair these chairs with chairs of some other color (Paula is
sad). And we want to make them both happy :).
Third and final check: can we fill all the tables with chairs? For some color i, we can fill ai /4 (rounded
down to the nearest integer) tables . If we sum up the values for each color, we will get the maximum
number of tables we can fill with chairs. Now if that number is smaller than n, the answer is NE, otherwise
the answer is DA.

Task Dirigent
Prepared by: Josip Klepec
Necessary skills: arrays
For first subtask, we can try breaking the circle at each position and then check does it result in a sorted
sequence. Complexity of such approach is O(qn2 ).
For second subtask we can see that it is sufficient to try and break the circle at position which will result
in 1 being first in the sequence. In this approach we check if sequence is sorted only once and not n times.
Complexity is therefore O(qn).
For all points lets focus on neighbours (all pairs of students that are holding hands). There is also n such
pairs. Lets call a pair good if the one on the right (in clockwise direction) has bigger number, and bad
otherwise.
Observe that the condition from the task holds iff there is exactly 1 bad pair. For full points we will try
to maintain number of bad pairs.
After each swap, at most 4 pairs of neighbours change so we can easily maintain that number. Complexity
of such approach is O(n + q) because we have to initialy count number of bad pairs and also update it
after each swap.

Task Baltazar
Prepared by: Dorijan Lendvaj
Necessary skills: Djikstra’s algorithm, dynamic programming
For the first subtask, we can use Dijkstra to calculate the distance between cities 1 and n, and after that
for each road we can calculate the distance between cities 1 and n if the length of that road is increased
by 2 km and see if that distance is higher than the initial distance by 1 km, for a total time complexity of
O(m2 log m).



                                                   1 od 3
      Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
      Round 3, January 14th 2023                                                                    Editorial


For the second subtask, the guarantee of that subtask tells us that, no matter which road’s length is
increased by 2 km, due to the road between 1 and n the length of the shortest path will be increased by at
most 1 km, so we’re looking for roads whose increase of length by 2 km changes the length of the shortest
path between 1 and n. So, we’re looking for roads which are on all shortest paths between 1 and n. If di is
the length of the shortest path between 1 and i, then let’s make a directed graph in which we put an edge
between ai and bi if dai + wi = bi , then each path between 1 and n in the new graph corresponds to a
shortest path between 1 and n, so we need to find the edges that are in all paths from 1 to n. That can
be done by comparing the number of paths from 1 to n with the number of paths from 1 to n that pass
through that edge. We can use dynamic programming to calculate the number of paths from 1 to each
vertex, as well as the number of paths from each vertex to n, then the number of paths between 1 and n
that pass through an edge between x and y is equal to the product of the number of paths from 1 to x
and the number of paths from y to n. Those numbers are very large, but we can look at them modulo 5
randomly generated prime numbers between 1 and 109 . Let’s calculate the probability that this method
says that the total number of paths and the number of paths passing through a given edge is equal, even
though in reality it isn’t. For that to happen, the difference between those 2 numbers must be divisible by
all 5 prime numbers we chose. It can easily be seen that the number of paths between 1 and n is < 2n ,
so their difference is < 2n , so for n ≤ 3 · 105 it has less than 2 · 104 different prime factors. There are
more than 5 · 107 prime numbers up to 109 . So, the chance that it’s divisible by all 5 primes is at most
     4
(2·10
   5 )
     7 ≈ 10−17 , and the probability that one of the m edges gives a wrong answer is that multiplied by
(5·10
   5 )
m, so about 3 · 10−12 . In practice, the probability is much smaller because it’s impossible to make test
cases such that the difference in the number of paths are whichever numbers we want; the number of ways
to choose m numbers ≤ 2n is about (2n )m , and the number of possible graphs is about (n2 )m , which is
much smaller; in practice just 1 prime number is enough.
For the third subtask, we also need to check for each road whether it’s on all paths from 1 to n of length
dn + 1. To do that, we can check if it’s on all shortest paths from 1 to n with a length of a different parity
than dn and making sure that that shortest path has a length of dn + 1. To do that, we can replace each
vertex and edge with 2 vertices and 2 edges; the new vertices will be one for paths of odd length and one
for paths of even length, and we can then do the almost the same thing as for the second subtask. Then a
road increases the length of the shortest path by 1 if and only if the length of the shortest path between 1
and n with a length of different parity than dn is dn + 1, if it’s on all shortest paths between 1 and n and
it’s not on all shortest paths between 1 and n with a length different parity than dn .

Task Bomboni
Prepared by: Patrick Pavić
Necessary skills: dynamic programming, number theory
This problem can be solved with dynamic programming. The easiest approach is to keep the product
in the current state, but the product can become really big. So the smarter approach is instead of the
product p, keep gcd(p, k). Notice that a number p is divisible by k if and only if gcd(p, k) = k. Notice the
following (the proof is left as an exercise to the reader):



                                  gcd(pq, k) = gcd(gcd(p, k) · gcd(q, k), k)



So let us define dpi,j,g as the number of paths starting at the upper left cell and ending at the cell (i, j)
such that the greatest common divisor of the product of the numbers on the candy and k is equal to g.
Now it is easy to see the relation. We shall analyse the time complexity. Notice that all numbers smaller
than 106 have at most 300 divisors, which means at most 300 different values of g = gcd(p, k). So the
number of states is O(300 · N 2 ) which is enough with a constant relation.



                                                   2 od 3
      Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
      Round 3, January 14th 2023                                                                  Editorial


Task Skrivača
Prepared by: Petar Sruk
Necessary skills:
For first subtask notice that if av = v as soon as Marin enters room v the game ends. Also if av is adjacent
to v Marin can first go to room v and in the next move enter room av and the game ends. In the only
remaining case it is enough to check only the last step of the game, if in his last move Marin goes from
room u to room v we need to check if Luka can get from room au to room av without passing through
room v. For that it is enough to remove vertex v from graph and check if au and av are connected with
a standard dfs algorithm. Now that we know all possible last moves we can easily calculate how many
moves are necessary to end the game from each starting room using bfs. Since there are 2m possible last
moves (one for each direction of each edge), and dfs and bfs run in O(n + m) time complexity, the full
time complexity of this approach is O(m(n + m)).
In the second subtask the graph is a tree so to check if au is connected to av after removing vertex v we
can use LCA which has time complexity of O(log(n)).
Consider av ̸= v nor av is adjacent to v, the game can only end in articulation points. Furthermore,
since for each articulation point it is fairly easy to construct hiding strategy for which the game can
end in that vertex, we conclude that the second part of the third subtask is equivalent to: "There are at
most 5 articulation points." We can find articulation points using dfs spanning tree in time complexity of
O(n + m). Since there are at most 5 of them, for each articulation point v we can check if av is connected
to au with dfs similar to the first subtask.
For complete solution we need to check if vertices av and au are connected after removing vertex v faster.
In dfs spanning tree consider times of entry for each vertex in the same connected component with respect
to some articulation point v. It holds that times of entry of every vertex in some connected component
that is not connected to the root of dfs spanning tree form a continuous interval. The claim follows from
the fact that dfs visits all nodes from some connected component before recursively backtracking back to
the articulation point. Now we can determine in which interval some node belongs using binary search,
and if it doesn’t belong to any interval we know it is in the component connected to the root of dfs
spanning tree. Time complexity of such approach is O(n + m log(n)). For implementation details refer to
attached source code.
In the attached source codes there will also be an alternative solution to this problem.




                                                  3 od 3
