      Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
      Round 5, March 11th 2023                                                                    Editorial


Editorial
Tasks, test data and solutions were prepared by: Vito Anić, Marin Kišić, Josip Klepec, Dorijan Lendvaj,
Martina Licul, Patrick Pavić, and Petar Sruk.
Implementation examples are given in attached source code files.

Task Kalendar
Prepared by: Marin Kišić and Martina Licul
Necessary skills: loops, strings, arrays
We can create an array consisting of d − 1 zeroes, the integers from 1 to n, and then, if necessary, some
more zeroes, so that the length of the array is divisible by 7. The zeroes represents the missing days, i.e.
the ones wi will replace with ’...’.
The length of this array divided by 7 is the number of rows the calendar wil have. We can now iterate
through the array and create the rows: depending on the element of the arrays, we will determine which
three characters should we add.
The above described solution is without decorations. We can add them easily: the first and last row are
always the same, and all the other rows can be made with a little addition to the solution from above.

Task Diskurs
Prepared by: Josip Klepec
Necessary skills: bitmasks
Let’s look at the numbers as bitstrings of length m. For a number x, let xc be a number that has flipped
binary representation.
For example, for m = 5 i x = 13 it follows xc = 18 because x = 011012 i xc = 100102 . Exactly xc would
be ideal candidate for biggest hamming distance with x, but xc is not necessarily a part of a.
Let us describe two possible solutions:

   • First solution is based on the fact that
                                 maxy∈a hamming(x, y) = m − miny∈a (xc , y).
      intuitively, we want a number as similar to xc as possible.
     Let us try to calculate minimal hamming distance for every number in [0, 2m − 1]. For every number
     that appears in a it is 0. It leads us to a BFS solution, where each number in [0, 2m − 1] is a node in
     our graph and the edges represent changing exactlu one bit. In a graph constructed in such fashion
     hamming distance between two numbers is exactly the length of shortest path between corresponding
     nodes. So we start BFS algorithm with every number from a in our queue and we will get the desired
     minimal distances.
   • Second solution is based on dynamic programming. Let popcount(x) number of ones in binary
     representation of x. Solution will be based on following identity:
                      hamming(x, y) = popcount(x) + popcount(y) − 2 · popcount(x & y)
      Intuitively, each one in binary representation of each number contributes 1 to hamming distance,
      but then each common one decreases it by 2.
     We want to calculate dp(mask) - maximum number of ones for some number in a but each one that
     is not in mask we penalize by 2. Formally,
                         dp(mask) = maxx∈a (popcount(x) − 2 · popcount(x & mask c ))


                                                 1 od ??
       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 5, March 11th 2023                                                                           Editorial


      Then, the solution for some x will be given as popcount(x) + dp(xc ). The above dp can be calculted
      with standard dp with bitmasks methods. For details check the official solution where this dp is
      called dpDown.

Complexity of both solutions is O(2m · m).

Task Logaritam
Prepared by: Petar Sruk
Necessary skills: prime factorization, math
Since a1·1 = a1 + a1 , a1 has to be equal to 0, so if the first element is changed the sequence cannot become
logarithmic again. It is easily shown that axy = ax + ay for every pair of positive integers x, y is equivalent
to am = α1 ap1 + α2 ap2 + · · · + αk apk for positive integer m = pα  1 · · · pk . We conclude that logarithmic
                                                                       1       αk

sequence is uniquely defined by values at prime indices. If the index p of changed element is prime one
possible way to "fix" the sequence is to change all of the elements at indices which are multiples of p,
there are ⌊ np ⌋ − 1 of them. If that is the minimal number of changes necessary, then for any index x of
changed element the minimal number of changes necessary will be ⌊ greatest prime     n
                                                                                       factor of x ⌋ − 1 (since it is
necessary to change at least one prime factor of x).
We will prove that is the solution and we can implement it with standard algorithm for finding prime
                    √
factorization in O(q n).
Proof: Using induction by n let’s prove a stronger claim for odd primes p: "Changing multiples of p is the
only minimal solution".
If n is not divisible by p the number of changes stays the same and the solution is unique.
If n is dividisble by p then clearly the solution for n − 1 needs to be expanded by changing n-th element
and we get that ⌊ np ⌋ − 1 is the least number of changes. Assuming that there exists another minimal
solution that solution doesn’t change n-th element and it is necessary to change another odd prime index
q (for q = 2 it can be seperately shown it requires more than minimal changes) for which by induction
hypothesis has unique solution for first n− element. Since 2q is not divisible by p that solution would
have at least ⌊ np ⌋ changes so it is not minimal.
For p = 2 it doesn’t necessarily hold that minimal solution is unique (for prime n3 < q ≤ n2 it is possible
to change q instead of 2q), however it still holds that the minimal number of changes necessary is ⌊ n2 ⌋ − 1.
The proof similar to the previous is left for the reader as exercise as well as finding implementation which
runs in time complexity of O(n + q).

Task Slastičarnica
Prepared by: Vito Anić and Patrick Pavić
Necessary skills: dynammic programming
Let dp(l, r) be the maximum number of customers we can serve if we still have cakes al , al+1 , . . . ar at the
table. For the first subtask, we can use the simple transition:
                                                                  j=r+1
 dp(l, r) = max(maxi=0
                   i<l (dp(i, r) + check(i, l − 1, dp(i, r))), maxj<n (dp(l, j) + check(r + 1, j, dp(l, j))),

where check(L, R, x) is a function that returns 1 if it is possible to satisfy customer x with the cakes
aL , aL+1 , . . . aR , and 0 otherwise. Time complexity is O(n3 ) or O(n4 ), depending on the implementation
of the function check.
Similarly, for the second subtask if all di are equal to 1, then we only need to check dp(l − 1, r) and
dp(l, r + 1) to determine dp(l, r).
That leads us to the complete solution. Is it possible somehow to check only neighboring states and get
the required solution? It is! Instead of memorizing only the maximum number of customers we can serve,


                                                     2 od ??
       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 5, March 11th 2023                                                                      Editorial


we will memorize two more things: the biggest number of cakes that is possible to give to the current
customer outside the left and the right border. For example, let k be the number of cakes we can give to
the current customer outside of the left border. Two things need to be satisfied:

   • dp[l − k][r] = x (it is possible to give all the cakes to the current customer)

   • al−k , al−k+1 , . . . al−1 ≥ sx (all the cakes have sweetness greater or equal to the required value)

Now we do not need to check every state, only the neighbouring ones. When one of the counters becomes
equal to dx , we can give those cakes to the current customer, and increase the customer number by 1.
Total time complexity is O(n2 ).

Task Zastave
Prepared by: Patrick Pavić
Necessary skills: calculus, binary search
                                                                                                   √
Let’s look at the case n = 1. Let f (x) be the area of the flag with height x. It follows f (x) = x r2 − x2 .
The function is increasing until x = √r2 and decreasing afterwards. It follows for x < √r2 the solution is
                                            2
f (x) and for x ≥ √r2 the solution is r4 .
Notice:


                                                       p                    x2
                                           f ′ (x) =       r 2 − x2 − √
                                                                          r 2 − x2



Now for the general case. The function f (x, r) will be analogous to the previous but for any r. Notice
that the function f ′ (x) is decreasing on the interval (0, √r2 ). If we were solving the discrete version, it
would be enough to always take the element which would increase our solution the most, the correctness
of this algorithm relies on the fact that the discrete derivative is decreasing. In the continuous case, the
analogous solution is to always move the point which currently has the largest derivative. But, it is easier
to fix a derivative t and check whether the sum of xi ’s such that f ′ (xi , ri ) = t is smaller than S. Notice
that for such xi :


                                      s
                                          4ri2 − t2 −    (t2 − 4ri2 )2 − 16(ri4 − t2 ri2 )
                                                        p
                               xi =
                                                                8



Now it is enough to find such a t with binary search, it is enough to do 100 steps for the wanted precision.
The final complexity is O(100n). There are some edge cases that need to be checked by hand.




                                                           3 od ??
