       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 3, December 13th 2025                                                                    Editorial


Editorial
Tasks, test data and solutions were prepared by: Toni Brajko, Sofija Velkovska, Fran Škarica and Jakov
Celin.
Implementation examples are given in attached source code files.

Task Kist
Prepared by: Jakov Celin
Required knowledge: matrices, distance computation in a grid
For the complete solution, we maintain two variables x and y representing the row and column of the
matrix where we are currently located. Initially, we are in the cell at row and column (n + 1)/2. If we
encounter a letter that moves us in one of the directions, we move in that direction if possible, i.e., if
after the move we do not leave the matrix. If we encounter a letter that colors some cells, we iterate over
the entire matrix and compute the distance of each cell from the cell at row x and column y.
The only thing left is to compute the distance between two arbitrary cells of the matrix. Note that the
distance between two cells of the matrix is equal to the sum of the row distance and the column distance
of those two cells. The reason is that in one step, in four directions, we can get closer to the other cell
by exactly 1 row or 1 column. The distance between rows a and b is equal to |a − b|, i.e., the absolute
difference of rows a and b. Another way to compute row distance is subtracting the smaller row from the
larger one. We use the same approach to compute the distance between two columns. For implementation
details, see the attached official solution.

Task Festival
Prepared by: Sofija Velkovska
Necessary skills: dynamic programming
Let’s label the candies from largest to smallest with the numbers from 1 to n, with candy number 1 being
the largest and candy number n being the smallest. If k = 1 all of the candies have to be in one box and
candy number 1 has to be first. Any remaining candy can be placed in the second position in the box, so,
we have n − 1 options. Similarly, any of the remaining n − 2 candies can be placed in the third postion -
that’s n − 2 options, n − 3 options for the fourth position, ..., 1 option for the last position. In total there
are 1 · (n − 1) · (n − 2) · (n − 3) · ... · 1 or (n − 1)! ways to arrange the candies in the box.
When n ≤ 10, we can just generate all of the partitons of the set {1, 2, ..., n} and if a partition is made up
of exactly k subsets, we can then calculate the number of ways to order the candies in each of its subset
using the same logic that was explained for the k = 1 case. Multiplying the numbers for each subset, we
get the answer for the whole partition.
Now, consider we have 2 boxes. We will process the candies one by one from candy number 1 to candy
number n. Let’s denote the number of ways to arrange the first m candies with dp(m). Assume we have
already calculated the number dp(m − 1) and we want to calculate dp(m). For the m-th candy, we could
have either already arranged the first m − 1 candies into 2 boxes and then added the m-th one to one of
those boxes, or we could have placed the m-th candy in a box by itself while all of the other ones are in
the other box.
In the first case, we could have taken any arrangment of the first m − 1 candies into two boxes and then
added the m-th candy after any of the already placed candies. We can’t place it before the first candy in
both of the boxes because the m-th candy and any candies that might be possibly added to the box later
are smaller than all of the candies currently in the box. This would go against the rule saying that the
first candy has to be the largest, so, it isn’t possible to place the new candy before the currently first
candy in either box leaving us with a total of m − 1 possible positions for it. This can be done for any


                                                    1 od 4
       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 3, December 13th 2025                                                                  Editorial


initial arrangment of the first m − 1 candies - that’s a total of (m − 1) · dp(m − 1) ways.
In the second case, all of the other m − 1 candies have to be in the other box - this can be done in (m − 1)!
ways as seen in the case where k = 1. So, dp(m) = (m − 1) · dp(m − 1) + (m − 1)! for m ≥ 2 and dp(1) = 0
(we can’t arrange one candy into two boxes).
We can expand this idea onto the case where k > 2. We will use dp(m, p) to denote the number of
ways to arrange the first m candies into exactly p boxes. If we assumed the first m − 1 candies were
already arranged using p boxes and we want to add the new candy into one of these boxes, we could
do that in (m − 1) · dp(m − 1, p) ways. If we want the m-th candy in a box all by itself, we need to
calculate the number of ways we could have placed the previous m − 1 candies in p − 1 boxes - that
is exactly the number dp(m − 1, p − 1). Therefore, the dynamic programming transition should be
dp(m, p) = (m − 1) · dp(m − 1, p) + dp(m − 1, p − 1). For the base cases we have dp(1, 1) = 1 (there’s one
way to arrange one candy in one box), dp(0, p) = 0 for p > 0 (the boxes mustn’t be empty according to
the rules) and dp(m, 0) = 0 for m > 0 (we can’t arrange some positive number of candies in 0 boxes).

Task Domjenak
Prepared by: Ivan Janjić
Required knowledge: graph theory, bipartite graphs
In graph theory terms, we need to find the longest alternating path with respect to a unique perfect
matching in a bipartite graph. From each pair in the perfect matching, select one vertex such that the
selected set is independent. Call this set the "left side", and call the vertices we did not select the "right
side".
Suppose we have found a perfect matching and momentarily ignore the uniqueness condition. The
symmetric difference with some other perfect matching is a union of alternating cycles and isolated
vertices.
We can fix the direction in which we traverse alternating cycles. In other words, we decide that when
traversing a matching edge, we always go, for example, from the left side to the right. This means that
when traversing an edge that is not part of the matching, we go from the right side to the left.
The previous observations motivate the following transformation: direct all edges that are part of the
perfect matching to point from the left side to the right, and direct edges that are not part of the matching
from the right side to the left. We obtain a directed graph where directed paths/cycles correspond to
alternating paths/cycles (with respect to the chosen matching) in the original graph.
Returning to the uniqueness condition, it is easy to observe that the existence of a directed cycle in the
graph is equivalent to the existence of at least one additional perfect matching. Conclusion: this directed
graph is acyclic.
Finding the longest path in such a graph is a known problem that can be solved in O(N + M ) time. What
remains is to find the perfect matching sufficiently fast. Note that in an acyclic directed graph, there
exists a vertex with no outgoing edges. This implies the existence of a vertex (on the left side) in the
original graph that has only one neighbor. Remove this vertex and its neighbor from the graph and mark
them as matched. Repeat the process until all vertices are matched. This algorithm can be implemented
in O(N + M ) time. Finally, the total time complexity of the solution is O(N + M ). Additionally, the
longest path can be computed in parallel with finding the perfect matching. For implementation details,
see the official solution.




                                                     2 od 4
       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 3, December 13th 2025                                                                  Editorial


Task Država
Prepared by: Jakov Celin
Required knowledge: dynamic programming, dp rerooting, complexity analysis
We solve the task by fixing the capital city P (rooting the tree at node P ) and counting, for each size, how
many states of that size exist with capital P . Let dp(x, k) be the number of states of size k such that the
secondary cities are located in the subtree of x, and the capital of the state is x. Note that P is the fixed
capital of the states we are counting, but we still treat x as the capital in the dynamic programming state.
Now consider merging the subtree of child a with the remainder of the subtree of parent b. Let the size
of the subtree of node a be sa , and the size of the subtree of node b be sb . Then the transitions can be
written (ignoring modular arithmetic):

for (int i = s[b]; i >= 0; i--) {
    for (int j = s[a]; j >= 1; j--) {
         dp[b][i + j] += dp[b][i] * dp[a][j];
    }
}

We can imagine this state merging as choosing some of the sa nodes from the subtree of a and combining
them with all possible numbers of nodes from the subtree of b. Note that the time complexity of this
transition is O(sb · sa ).
Let us compute the time complexity of computing the dynamic programming states if we fix the capital
P . Although it seems that the time complexity is O(n3 ), it is actually O(n2 ). For complexity proofs, see
Section 7 of the blog and the solution to the problem Džumbus. The total time complexity of this solution
is O(n3 ) because the complexity is O(n2 ) per fixed capital. This solution was fast enough to solve the first
3 subtasks.
We solve the last subtask using the dp rerooting technique. Note that when "moving" the capital P to one
of its children a, only the values of the states at nodes P and a change. Instead of merging the subtree of
the child into the parent, we now need to cut it off and merge the parent into the child’s subtree.
Let sa be the size of the subtree of the child to which we move the capital P . Then sb = n − sa . The time
complexity of the "new" merging and cutting operations can be analyzed similarly to the time complexity
in the previous example. The merging procedure is identical to the one in the previously shown code
section, and the cutting procedure is achieved by reversing the merging operations (see the code for
implementation details). The complexities of both procedures are O(sb · sa ), i.e., O((n − sa ) · sa ).
Note that for the edge connecting nodes P and a, the value (n − sa ) · sa is equal to the number of paths
in the tree that pass through that edge. Thus, the total complexity of the described solution is equal to
the sum of distances of all ordered pairs of nodes in the tree. From the problem statement, we know that
the distance between any two nodes is less than or equal to 36 (define this value as d). It follows that the
total time complexity of the solution is O(n2 · d).




                                                   3 od 4
       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 3, December 13th 2025                                                                        Editorial


Task Ravnalo
Prepared by: Jakov Celin
Required knowledge: working with fractions
We need to compute the minimum number of segments needed to draw the wall described in the task.
Note that the minimum number of segments is obtained using a simple strategy: extend all segments from
the previous column that can be extended into the current column, and start drawing the remaining ones
at the beginning of the current column.
Let ai be the height of the i-th column, and bi the number of parts it is divided into. Then the i-th column
consists of bi + 1 segments, where the j-th (0 ≤ j ≤ bi ) is located at height abii · j, i.e., the vertical distance
between consecutive segments in the column is abii . Define ci = abii .
Now we only need to find the number of segments that can be extended between two consecutive columns
of the wall (call them i and i + 1) using fractions ci and ci+1 . One way to find the intersection of segments
is to find the "least common multiple" of two fractions by taking the ratio of the least common multiple of
the numerators and the greatest common divisor of the denominators. Another way is to set the fractions ci
and ci+1 in proportion, express the segments forming the intersection using that proportion, and compute
their number.
Both methods compute the number of intersecting segments in O(log M ), where M represents the
maximum value in the arrays a and b. The total time complexity of the solution is O(n log M ).




                                                      4 od 4
