                                                     BOI 2022                                                Day 2
                                                 Lübeck, Germany                              Task: communication
                                               April 28 – May 3, 2022                                 Language: en



Flight to the Ford (communication)

Every break-in, even if hypothetical, needs a good escape plan. Thus, you have hired an assistant to
help you in your escape from the underwater vault you discovered yesterday.
In order for your plan to work, it will be important to communicate with your assistant. More
precisely, you will need to send them one of 𝑁 distinct messages (conveniently numbered from
1 to 𝑁). Unfortunately, your possibilities to send a message are very limited once you’re in your fancy
new submarine: There are only two different types of signals you can send. Therefore, you have to
encode your message as a sequence of these signals.
However, sending such a signal is a complicated process*
and can even fail; in this case, the wrong signal is sent. At
least you can be sure that this will never happen twice in
a row. Moreover, you will always know which signal was
actually sent, and will be able to react accordingly.
You already noticed that it might be impossible to unambigu-
ously communicate a message under these circumstances.
Hence, you will be happy when your assistant can determine Obviously the signal displayed in the picture is
at most two messages that you possibly wanted to commu- to be interpreted as the bit 1
nicate, i.e. such that your original message is one of them. Remembering that you are a talented
programmer, you now want to write a program which
     • you can use to decide which signals to send to your assistant, and
     • your assistant can use to determine the two possible messages.
As sending signals from your submarine might raise suspicion,† you can send at most 250 of them.
Beware moreover that your assistant will have to react to your message quickly. Thus, they must
notice when the communication ends without waiting for further signals!


Communication

This is a communication task, in which your program is run several times for each testcase. You have
to write the following functions; in each run of your submission, precisely one of them will be called,
multiple times and possibly with different parameters:
     • The function void encode(int 𝑁, int 𝑋) where as above 𝑁 denotes the number of distinct messages
       and 𝑋 is the message you want to communicate, where 1 ≤ 𝑋 ≤ 𝑁. Inside encode you may make
       up to 250 calls to the grader function int send(int s); s must be either 0 or 1, meaning you want
       to send signal 𝑠. The return value of this function tells you which signal was actually sent. This
       value may differ from s, but for any two consecutive calls to send inside the same call to encode
       this will happen at most once.
     • The function std::pair⟨int, int⟩ decode(int 𝑁) where 𝑁 is the same as in encode. For each call to
       encode, there is one call to decode. Inside decode you may call the grader function int receive()
       which returns the next signal sent during the corresponding call of encode. In the end, decode
       should return a pair of two integers 1 ≤ 𝑎, 𝑏 ≤ 𝑁 (the case 𝑎 = 𝑏 is allowed) such that the original
       message was one of 𝑎 or 𝑏.
* Involving the submarine’s torpedo tube, a surprising and elegant application of Dijkstra’s algorithm, and a family size
  spaghetti pack
†
  It does lead to major radio interference as well as deeply disturbed local wildlife after all.




                                                          1/4
                                             BOI 2022                                           Day 2
                                          Lübeck, Germany                        Task: communication
                                        April 28 – May 3, 2022                           Language: en



      You will automatically fail a testcase if you call receive inside decode more often than send was
      called in the respective run of encode. However, you are allowed to call receive fewer times
      than that.
If any of your function calls does not satisfy the above constraints, your program will be immediately
terminated and judged as Not correct for the respective testcase. You must not write to standard
output or read from standard input; otherwise you may receive the verdict Security violation!.
You must include the file communication.h in your source code. To test your program locally, you
can link it with sample_grader.cpp, which can be found in the attachment for this task in CMS (see
below for a description of the sample grader, and see sample_grader.cpp for instructions on how
to run it with your program). Beware that for simplicity this sample grader does not run your program
twice but instead calls both encode and decode (exactly once) as part of a single run. The attachment
also contains a sample implementation as communication_sample.cpp.


Important technical remarks

As mentioned above, the functions encode and decode can be called several times per run. Please
note the following:
   1. It is not guaranteed that the calls to decode will appear in the same order as the calls to encode.
   2. The time limit below and the runtime displayed inside CMS refer to the average runtime of all
      calls to encode and decode in a given run. Put differently, when there are 𝐾 calls to encode or 𝐾
      calls to decode in a given run, then your program must not take more than 𝐾 ⋅ 0.005 s for this
      run. It is guaranteed that there at least 50 calls to encode or decode in each run.
   3. As usual, the memory limit refers to the maximum memory consumption at any point in time
      during execution.


Constraints

We always have 3 ≤ 𝑁 ≤ 109 .
Subtask 1 (𝟏𝟓 points). 𝑁 = 3
Subtask 2 (𝟖𝟓 points). No further constraints.
Your actual score in Subtask 2 depends on the maximum number 𝑤max of signals sent over all messages
in testcases in this subtask according to the following piecewise linear function (rounded to the unique
nearest integer):
            score
           85

           65


           35

           15
            5                                                                          𝑤max
                                        100 110    140              200          250

In particular, to get full score you must not make more than 100 calls to send per testcase.



                                                  2/4
                                               BOI 2022                                          Day 2
                                          Lübeck, Germany                         Task: communication
                                        April 28 – May 3, 2022                            Language: en



Example Interaction

Consider a testcase with 𝑁 = 1337 and 𝑋 = 42.
First, the grader calls your function encode as encode(1337, 42). Then, a possible interaction between
your program and the grader could look as follows:
     Your program               Return value                            Explanation
 send(1)                    0                        the wrong signal was sent
 send(0)                    0                        the correct signal was sent (as was guaranteed)
 send(1)                    1                        the correct signal was sent again
 send(1)                    0                        the wrong signal was sent

Afterwards (in a new run of your program) the grader calls your function decode as decode(1337).
Here a possible interaction could look as follows:
     Your program               Return value                            Explanation
 receive()                  0                        the first call to send returned 0 (although this
                                                        wasn’t the parameter you called it with)
 receive()                  0                        the second call to send returned 0
 receive()                  1                        the third call to send returned 1
 return {1337, 42}          —                        your solution is correct and is accepted
Note that your program would have been allowed to call receive one more time.


Grader

The sample grader first expects on standard input the integers 𝑁 and 𝑋 (1 ≤ 𝑋 ≤ 𝑁). Then, the grader
calls encode(𝑁, 𝑋) and writes to standard output a protocol of all calls to send by your program. For
each call to send it expects the return value on standard input.
Afterwards the grader calls decode(𝑁) and writes to standard output a protocol of all calls to receive
by your program. Upon termination, it writes one of the following messages to standard output:
Invalid input. The input to the grader via standard input was not of the above form.
Invalid send. You called send inside decode or you called send with a parameter different from 0 or 1.
Invalid reply to send. The return value to send given on standard input was neither 0 nor 1, or it
differed from the argument to send twice in a row.
Looks (and smells) fishy. You called send more than 250 times.
Invalid receive. You called receive inside encode.
Assistant waiting for Godot. You called receive more often than send.
Invalid answer. The function decode did not return a pair of integers between 1 and 𝑁.
Wrong answer. The pair returned by decode does not contain the original message 𝑋.
Correct: w signal(s) sent. The pair returned by decode contains the original message 𝑋 and there were
𝑤 calls to send.
In contrast, the grader actually used to judge your program will only output Not correct (for any of
the above errors) or Correct: w signal(s) sent. Moreover, it is adaptive, i.e. the parameters 𝑁 and 𝑋 as
well as the return values of send can depend on the behaviour of your program in the current as well
as other runs. Both the sample grader and the grader used to judge your program will terminate your
program automatically whenever one of the above errors occurs.



                                                  3/4
                     BOI 2022                           Day 2
                  Lübeck, Germany        Task: communication
                April 28 – May 3, 2022           Language: en



Limits

Time: 0.005 s
Memory: 8 MiB




                         4/4
                                                BOI 2022                                           Day 2
                                            Lübeck, Germany                                 Task: island
                                          April 28 – May 3, 2022                           Language: en



Stranded Far From Home (island)

You just couldn’t leave it alone… You actually carried out the break-in, and initially everything worked
out as planned. However, the communication with your assistant went terribly wrong.* Instead of
returning safely to Lübeck, you are now stranded on a small island, and your submarine is out of fuel.
To return in time for the BOI award ceremony, you now have to get to the
ferry on the other side of the island. However, the local population has
strange traditions. Ties are very important to them, and every village has
its own preferred tie color which might change over time.
A report from the internet tells you that different villages initially preferred
different tie colors. Unfortunately, the report is quite outdated. Since then,
every week exactly one village convinced a neighboring village to prefer
the same tie color as them. (Two villages are neighbors if they are directly
connected by a road.) However, this can only happen if there were at least
as many people on the entire island who preferred the tie color of the
first village as there were people who preferred the tie color of the second
village. Enough time has passed so that all islanders now prefer the same
tie color.
You are almost sure that the islanders won’t let you pass if you don’t wear a tie matching their
preference. To get to the ferry, you therefore plan to wear a tie of every color that the islanders could
prefer. However, wearing too many ties will make you look suspicious. Write a program that uses a
description of the island to calculate which ties you have to wear.


Input

The first line of the input contains two integers 𝑁 and 𝑀 where 𝑁 is the number of villages and 𝑀 is
the number of roads on the island. The villages are numbered from 1 to 𝑁.
The next line contains 𝑁 integers 𝑠1 , … , 𝑠𝑁 where 𝑠𝑖 describes the number of inhabitants of village 𝑖.
Each of the following 𝑀 lines contains two integers 𝑎 and 𝑏 (1 ≤ 𝑎, 𝑏 ≤ 𝑁, 𝑎 ≠ 𝑏), meaning that there is
a road between villages 𝑎 and 𝑏. All villages are connected to each other at least indirectly.


Output

Your program should output a string of length 𝑁 consisting of 0s and 1s. The 𝑖-th digit should be 1 if
and only if it is possible that all islanders now prefer the tie color that village 𝑖 preferred initially.


Constraints

It always holds that 1 ≤ 𝑁 ≤ 200 000, 0 ≤ 𝑀 ≤ 200 000, and 1 ≤ 𝑠𝑖 ≤ 109 .
Subtask 1 (𝟏𝟎 points). 𝑁 ≤ 2 000 and 𝑀 ≤ 2 000.
Subtask 2 (𝟏𝟎 points). 𝑠1 ≥ … ≥ 𝑠𝑁 , and every village 𝑏 with 𝑏 > 1 is directly connected to exactly one
                       village 𝑎 with 𝑎 < 𝑏.

*   That was to be expected, right?




                                                    1/2
                                                 BOI 2022                                           Day 2
                                           Lübeck, Germany                                   Task: island
                                         April 28 – May 3, 2022                             Language: en



Subtask 3 (𝟏𝟓 points). Villages 𝑎 and 𝑏 are directly connected if and only if |𝑎 − 𝑏| = 1.
Subtask 4 (𝟑𝟎 points). There are at most 10 distinct numbers of inhabitants.
Subtask 5 (𝟑𝟓 points). No further constraints.


Examples

               Input                                   Output

 4 4                                   1110
 2 2 4 3
 1 2
 1 3
 2 3
 3 4

 4 3                                   1110
 4 2 2 1
 1 2
 3 2
 4 1


The following picture shows the first example:

                                             2
                                         1
                                                       4            3
                                                   3            4
                                             2
                                         2


The first digit of the output is 1 since it is possible that all islanders now prefer the tie color that
village 1 preferred initially. This could happen as follows: In the first week, village 1 convinces village
2 that their tie color is better. After that, there are four people who prefer the tie color of village 1.
Therefore, village 1 can now convince village 3 of their tie color, and if afterwards village 3 convinces
village 4, everybody prefers the tie color that village 1 preferred initially.
The last digit of the output is 0 since it is impossible that village 4 convinces anyone of their tie color.
This is because village 4 is only connected to village 3, but village 3 has more inhabitants.
Note that the second example is a valid test case for the second subtask.


Limits

Time: 1 s
Memory: 512 MiB




                                                   2/2
                                                        BOI 2022                                   Day 2
                                                    Lübeck, Germany                         Task: passes
                                                  April 28 – May 3, 2022                   Language: en



Boarding Passes (passes)

After successfully navigating the local traditions, you managed to catch the ferry just in time for its
departure. However, you did not expect that many people to be headed for Lübeck! Since you do not
want to be late for the award ceremony,* you want to speed up the boarding process of the ferry.
The ferry has a single row of 𝑁 seats which is fully booked
by 𝑁 passengers. Each passenger has a ticket that gives
their assigned seat and one out of 𝐺 boarding groups.
When boarding, these groups are called one after the
other. The passengers within each boarding group will
board in a random order, with all possible orders being
equally likely. Each passenger can board the ferry either
at the front or back of the row of seats and will then move
to their assigned seat before another passenger boards.
You determined that the most time-consuming element
of this process is when a passenger has to pass someone who is already seated.† Fortunately you
found a staff uniform in a nearby locker, so you can decide the order in which the groups are boarding
and tell each passenger before the boarding begins whether to board the ferry from the front or back
of the row of seats.
Write a program that uses the ticket information to calculate the minimal expected number of passes
during boarding if you choose the order of the boarding groups and the assignment of the passengers
to the front and back optimally.


Note

Given an order of the boarding groups and an assignment of the passengers to the front and back,
the expected number of passes is defined as

                                                 1 ⋅ 𝑝1 + 2 ⋅ 𝑝 2 + 3 ⋅ 𝑝 3 + ⋯

where 𝑝𝑘 is the probability that there are exactly 𝑘 passes during boarding. Put differently, this is the
average number of passes among all possible orders of the passengers in each boarding group.


Input

The input consists of a string of 𝑁 characters 𝑠1 … 𝑠𝑁 where 𝑠𝑖 is one of the first 𝐺 uppercase characters
of the English alphabet, representing the boarding group of the passenger assigned to the 𝑖-th seat in
the row (with the seat at the front of the row being seat 1).


Output

Your program should output a single number, the minimal expected number of passes if you choose
the order of the boarding groups and the assignment of the passengers to the front and back optimally.
Your answer will be accepted if its absolute error is at most 0.001.
*   You will also need some time to store all your stolen art in the hostel.
†
    The luggage containing all those ties is a considerable obstacle in the aisle.




                                                              1/2
                                             BOI 2022                                          Day 2
                                          Lübeck, Germany                               Task: passes
                                        April 28 – May 3, 2022                         Language: en



Constraints

We always have 1 ≤ 𝐺 ≤ 15 and 1 ≤ 𝑁 ≤ 100 000.
Subtask 1 (𝟓 points).   𝐺 = 1, i.e. there is only one boarding group.
Subtask 2 (𝟐𝟓 points). 𝐺 ≤ 7 and 𝑁 ≤ 100
Subtask 3 (𝟑𝟎 points). 𝐺 ≤ 10 and 𝑁 ≤ 10 000
Subtask 4 (𝟒𝟎 points). No further constraints.


Examples

                            Input                                           Output

 AACCAA                                                          1

 HEHEHEHIHILOL                                                   7.5

 ONMLKJIHGFEDCBAABCDEFGHIJKLMNO                                  0

 AAAAAAAAAAAAA...AAAAAAAAAAAAAA                                  100800.5


In the fourth example, the input consists of the character A repeated 899 times. All example inputs
can be found in the attachment for this task in CMS.

In the first example, group C should board before group A and the passengers in the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
seats should board from the front while the rest should board from the back.
This makes it impossible for the two passengers of group C to pass each other, and they will not pass
any passenger of group A since group C boards first. Moreover, the passengers of group A will not
pass any passenger of group C since all passengers of group A boarding from the front are seated in
front of the passengers of group C and all passengers of group A boarding from the back are seated
behind the passengers of group C.
Therefore, the only possible passes are the passenger in the 2nd seat passing the passenger in the
1st seat, which will only happen if the passenger in the 1st seat boards before the passenger in the
2nd seat, and the same for the passengers in the 5th and 6th seats. Since each of these events occurs
with a probability of 50%, it follows that the expected number of passes is equal to 1.


Limits

Time: 2 s
Memory: 1024 MiB




                                                  2/2
