                                                                                                 editor
                                                                                               Day 1 Tasks
                                                                                              English (ISC)




Text editor
Robert is competing in CEOI 2024. He has almost finished his solution to the hardest problem of
the day, and not just that, he's pretty sure it will get 100 points! There is just one small issue: He
made a typo! What's worse, his favorite computer mouse, which he had been using since 2008,
seems to have finally broken and isn't responding at all. Therefore, he will have to navigate to the
typo using the arrow keys on his keyboard.

Robert's program has N lines with lengths l1​ , l2​ , … , lN
                                                           ​ . Robert always ends his programs with an
empty line, therefore lN
                       ​ = 0. The cursor can be placed between two characters, as well as at the
start or end of a line. As such, line i has li​ + 1 possible cursor positions (called columns) numbered
from 1 to li​ + 1. For example, this is what a cursor placed on line 2 in column 6 would look like:




Robert wants to move his cursor from line s l​ column s c​ to line el​ column ec​ . He would like to know
the minimum number of key presses needed to do so.

The horizontal arrow keys are quite simple. Pressing left will move the cursor to the previous
column, unless the cursor was at the start of a line, in which case it will move to the end of the
previous line. Similarly, pressing right will move the cursor to the next column, or to the start of the
next line if the cursor was at the end of a line.

For example, left presses can look like this:




And right presses can look like this:




Pressing left at the very start of the file or pressing right at the very end of the file will have no
effect.




                                                                                            editor (1 of 4)
The vertical arrow keys are slightly more complicated. Pressing up will move the cursor to the
previous line and pressing down will move it to the next line, without changing the column number.
However, if this would put the cursor past the end of the new line, the cursor will jump to the end
of that line instead.

For example, up presses can look like this:




And down presses can look like this:




If pressing up or down would put the cursor on a line that doesn't exist, the cursor won't move at
all.


Input

The first line of input contains the integer N — the number of lines of Robert's solution. The
second line contains two integers s l​ and s c​ separated by spaces — the initial cursor position.
Similarly, the third line contains two integers e​l and e​c — the target cursor position. The fourth line
contains N space-separated integers l1​ , l2​ , … , lN
                                                     ​ — the length of each line.

Output

Your program should output a single line containing a single integer — the minimum number of
key presses to move the cursor from (s ​l , s ​c ) to (e​l , e​c ).




                                                                                            editor (2 of 4)
Examples

Example 1

Input:


   5
   3 1
   2 8
   7 10 9 9 0‎


Output:


   3‎


Robert can move the cursor to the target position using three key presses by pressing up, left and
down, in that order:




Alternatively, he could move his cursor to the target position equally quickly by pressing left, up
and down. It can be easily shown that it's impossible to reach the target position using at most two
key presses.

Example 2

Input:


   5
   1 20
   3 25
   25 10 40 35 0‎


Output:


   16‎


The shortest possible key press sequence consists of two down presses followed by fourteen right
presses.




                                                                                        editor (3 of 4)
Constraints

    1 ≤ N ≤ 106​
    0 ≤ li​ ≤ 109​ (for each i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ N )
     ​ =0
    lN
    1 ≤ s​l , e​l ≤ N
    1 ≤ s​c ≤ ls​ l​ + 1
    1 ≤ e​c ≤ le​ l​ + 1.

Subtasks

  1. (5 points) N ≤ 2
  2. (14 points) N ≤ 1 000, li​ ≤ 5 000 (for each i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ N )
  3. (26 points) N ≤ 1 000
  4. (11 points) li​ = lj​ (for each i, j such that 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N − 1)
  5. (44 points) no additional constraints




                                                                            editor (4 of 4)
