                                                                                             covid
                                                                                          Day 1 Tasks
                                                                                         English (ISC)




COVID tests
In Adam's school, there has been a new wave of the COVID epidemic. In order to prevent further
spreading, the school has decided to test all the students using antigen tests with samples of the
students' saliva.

Since all teachers have forgotten how to use those a long time ago, Adam signed himself up as a
volunteer to help with the tests.

He received saliva samples from N students (for privacy reasons, he is only allowed to know
identifiers from 0 to N − 1) and his task is to determine which samples are positive. Unfortunately,
it was too late when he realized that testing all students is an extremely long and boring task.
However, he realized that he can do the testing process in a smarter way than by testing the
samples one by one. If he mixes a subset of the samples and tests this mix, he will find out
whether all of the samples in this mix are negative or if at least one of them is positive. He could
use this to reduce the number of tests he needs to do!

Since there is enough saliva in each sample, he can test a sample as many times as he wants.
Furthermore, the tests are absolutely precise, so it never happens that different tests yield
different results for the same sample.

Under those conditions, he would like to optimize the process to use as few tests as possible.
However, he's busy with the testing, so the optimization of the process is up to you.

From local statistics, Adam was able to figure out that the probability that any given sample is
positive is equal to P , and that one sample being positive or negative isn't influenced by the
positivity or negativity of any other samples. Perhaps you can use this to optimize what tests he
performs?


Communication

This task is interactive.

Your program will be executed on a number of test cases. As part of one test case, and therefore
during one execution of your program, you will have to solve T different scenarios. The value of N
and P is the same across all scenarios, but which students' samples are positive will (most
probably) be different in each scenario.




                                                                                        covid (1 of 5)
You can either implement the required protocol yourself, or use the provided template. You can
find the template in CMS as a task attachment called ‎           .
                                                     template.cpp‎


The protocol

First, your program should read a line from the standard input containing an integer N , a real
number P and an integer T separated by spaces — the number of students, the probability of a
positive sample and the number of scenarios.

After that, the program can print queries to the standard output. Each query should be a single
line containing ‎
                Q‎, a space, and a string s of length N , where s ​i is ‎
                                                                        1‎if Adam should add the i -th
student's sample to the test, and ‎
                                  0‎otherwise. After printing this line, the program should flush the
standard output and then read one character on a single line which will be ‎
                                                                           P‎if at least one sample
from the tested group is positive, and ‎
                                       N‎otherwise.

The program can also print the answer as a single line to the standard output containing ‎
                                                                                         A‎, a
space, and a string s of length N , where s ​i is ‎
                                                  1‎if i -th student's sample is positive, and ‎
                                                                                               0‎otherwise.
After printing this line, the program should flush the standard output and then read one character
on a single line.

If the line contains ‎
                     C‎, then your answer was correct. In that case the program may start
performing queries about the next scenario, or, if this was your T -th answer, exit.

If the line contains ‎
                     W‎, then your answer wasn't correct. In that case the program should exit
immediately.

Please note that exiting after ‎
                               W‎is important for getting the right feedback from CMS. If your
program continues running, it may crash or receive some other unsuccessful verdict.

The template

If you are using the implementation of the protocol in ‎           , you need to implement the
                                                       template.cpp‎
function ‎                                . This function will be called once for each
         std::vector<bool> find_positive()‎
scenario. It must return a vector of Booleans of length N , where the i -th element is ‎
                                                                                       true‎if and
only if the i -th student's sample is positive.

To do so, you make use of the function ‎                                         . This
                                       bool test_students(std::vector<bool> mask)‎
function performs a test on a subset of samples. Its only argument is a vector of Booleans of
length N , where the i -th element is true if the i -th sample should be added to the mix. It returns
true‎if (and only if) at least one of the samples in the mix is positive.

You can also use the global variables ‎
                                      N‎and ‎
                                            P‎containing N and P from the statement. You may do
any initialization in the ‎
                          main‎function after the first call to ‎    .
                                                                scanf‎



                                                                                              covid (2 of 5)
Inputs

The judge for the task is not adaptive, which means that the positivity of individual samples is
determined prior to running your program. Furthermore, whether any given sample is positive has
been determined independently with a probability of P using a fair random number generator.


Subtasks and grading

There are two subtasks.


First subtask (10 points)

      N = 1 000
      T =1
      0≤P ≤1

A solution is accepted if it answers correctly and uses at most 2 ⋅ N queries on every test case.

Second subtask (90 points)

      N = 1 000
      T = 300
      0.001 ≤ P ≤ 0.2

This subtask uses partial scoring.

If your answer on any scenario is wrong, you will receive zero points. Otherwise, the number of
points for a given test case will be determined based on the average number of queries per
scenario. In general, a smaller number of queries yields a larger number of points. Let Q denote
the average number of queries used by your program across all scenarios, rounded down to one
decimal place. For each test case, we have computed a value F (see below). The score on a given
test case will be computed according to the following rules:

      If Q > 10 ⋅ F you will receive 0 points (wrong answer).
      If F < Q ≤ 10 ⋅ F , the number of points will be determined by the following formula:

                                                         F
                                             90 ⋅ ​
                                                  F + 4 ⋅ (Q − F )

      If Q ≤ F , you will receive the full 90 points.

Your solution will be graded on several test cases with different values of P . The total number of
points you'll receive will be the minimum number of points across all test cases (i.e., across all
probabilities P ).




                                                                                          covid (3 of 5)
There are the following test cases:


                                               P         F
                                         0.001        15.1

                                         0.005256     51.1

                                         0.011546     94.9

                                         0.028545    191.5

                                         0.039856    246.3

                                         0.068648    366.2

                                         0.104571    490.3

                                         0.158765    639.1

                                         0.2         731.4


The judging system will provide feedback for every test case. This feedback will include the value of
Q of your solution on each test case where you obtain a non-zero score.




                                                                                         covid (4 of 5)
Sample interaction

Here is a sample interaction with the grader. Please note that these values of N and T can't appear
in any subtask. Do not forget to flush the output after every line.


                                    Your input      Your output

                                    10 0.4 2‎
                                    ‎

                                                  Q 1000000000‎
                                                  ‎

                                    P‎
                                    ‎

                                                  Q 0000001000‎
                                                  ‎

                                    P‎
                                    ‎

                                                  Q 0000000001‎
                                                  ‎

                                    P‎
                                    ‎

                                                  Q 0111110110‎
                                                  ‎

                                    N‎
                                    ‎

                                                  A 1000001001‎
                                                  ‎

                                    C‎
                                    ‎

                                                  A 0000000000‎
                                                  ‎

                                    W‎
                                    ‎


The program solved the first scenario correctly, but not the second one, as the correct solution was
1100010010‎(which the program couldn't have known, as it didn't perform any queries). Even if
there were another scenario, the program should immediately terminate.




                                                                                        covid (5 of 5)
