       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 4, February 11th 2023                                                                          Editorial


Editorial
Tasks, test data and solutions were prepared by: Vito Anić, Gabrijel Jambrošić, Josip Klepec, Martina
Licul, and Patrick Pavić.
Implementation examples are given in attached source code files.

Task 7Krokods
Prepared by: Martina Licul
Necessary skills: if statement, for loop
In the first subtask, Paula has no crocodile cards, so we only need to compute the score as described in
the task statement.
In the second subtask, Paula has one crocodile card. We can try replacing the card with each of the letters
d, k, o, and r, calculate the score for each, and then output the maximum among the scores.
In the third subtask, Paula can have up to 10 crocodile cards. We want to try all possible combinations of
replacing crocodile cards, i. e. we want to find all combinations of numbers D, K, O and R (0 ≤ d, k, o, r ≤ m)
such that d + k + o + r ≤ m, where m is the number of crocodile cards. Since m is only up to 10, we can
try all combinations with 4 nested loops, each going from 0 to m, and each representing the number of
crocodile cards that will be replaced with a certain letter. For each combination, we will check if their sum
isn’t bigger than m, and then calculate the score. As in the second subtask, we will output the maximum
among the scores.

Task Zrinka
Prepared by: Josip Klepec
Necessary skills: dynamic programming
The first two subtask can be solved using greedy approach.
For full points we will use dynammic programing.
Let dp(i, j, f lag) represent the solution if we only consider the first i positions of the first array, the first
j positions of the second array, and if the largest number is in the first array, then f lag = 0, otherwise
f lag = 1 (and the largest number is in the second array).
For the transition we need only to consider 4 states: ((i − 1, j, 0), (i − 1, j, 1), (i, j − 1, 0), and (i, j − 1, 1)),
so the final complexity is O(nm).
For details check the official code.

Task Bojanje
Prepared by: Gabrijel Jambrošić
Necessary skills: dynammic programming, matrices, probabilities
To solve the first subtask, notice that, in order to not to decrease the number of different colours, Oliver
has to choose the same part of the paintinig in both steps. The probability that this will happen is n1 per
iteration, and ( n1 )t after t iterations.
The second subtask can be solved by using dynammic programming. The states will be all partitions of
the number n (sorted array of frequencies of each of the colours.) because symmetrical cases when we
rotate the frequencies of each colour are redundant. Now we go through all combinations of Oliver’s choice
of two parts and determine in which partition of n it will change into. This is the transition. We well
repeat it t times and then sum up all probabilities of partitions that consist of at least k colours.


                                                       1 od 2
      Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
      Round 4, February 11th 2023                                                                   Editorial


For solving the last subtask, it is necessary to notice that we are using always the same transition, and
that, actually, for each of the elements from the current state is a linear combination of elements from the
previous states. Because of that, we can store the states in a mathematical vector and create a transition
matrix, and then apply the matrix t times.

Task Mreža
Prepared by: Vito Anić
Necessary skills: binary search, persistent segment tree (alternatively parallel binary search), lowest common
ancestor
It is always optimal to repair the roads which have the smallest speed. We can solve the first subtask just
with this observation. For every query with using dfs we can find all the edges on the required path. Now
we just update the slowest edge until we run out of money. Time complexity O(nq log n)
Let us assume that we want to have the minimal driving speed x on some path. If we want to traverse
through some edge i there are three possible outcomes:

  • x ≤ vi : in this case the road speed is fast enough, we do not need to pay for road upgrade

  • vi < x ≤ si : in this case we need to upgrade the road to pass through it

  • si < x: in this case we cannot pass through this road at all. We will say that the price to pass
    through this edge is infinite.

Every edge has three possible ’states’. If x is smaller or equal than its speed, we do not to pay for it, if
it is between vi and si , we need to pay for it, and if it is larger than si we need to pay for it ’infinite’
amount of coins. Therefore, in two moments the state of the edge will change: when x = vi + 1 and when
x = si + 1. We will call that moments ’events’. Let us gather events of all edges and sort them.
From this moment two different solution of this problem is possible. We can use parallel binary search to
solve all queries at the same time. Every time we would go through all events and update them in segment
tree, and at certain moments return the sum of values on the path of some query. The second solution is
to use persistent segment tree. We would then for every query binary search the solution individually. In
both solution the final time complexity is O(n log n2 ).

Task Vrsta
Prepared by: Vito Anić
Necessary skills: number compression, segment tree
First, let us notice that we are only interested in the height of a student leading the warm-up. We can
just track the height and the number of students of that height. We can compress the heights of students
because to determine the height of a student who will lead the warm-up, we only need to know how many
students are taller and how many are shorter than him. So now the student heights are numbers from 1
to 200 000. We can now go through the order of students entering the gymnasium and will update the
segment tree. The i-th leaf of the segment tree will track the current number of students of height i in the
gymnasium. The values of other nodes will be the sum of the children’s values. If the current number
of children is x, then the warm-up will lead ⌊ x2 ⌋-th child in a sorted line. Let that number be y. Now
let’s determine the height using the segment tree. Start from the root of the segment tree and use this
algorithm until you reach the leaf: If the value of the left child is greater or equal to y, then go to the
left child. If the value is smaller than y, then reduce the y by the value of the left child and go to the
right child. The leaf index will be the compressed height of the required height. Total time complexity
O(n log n).




                                                   2 od 2
