       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 1, November 5th 2022                                                                 Editorial


Editorial
Tasks, test data and solutions were prepared by: Vito Anić, Nikola Dmitrović, Marin Kišić, Dorijan
Lendvaj, Martina Licul, Bartol Markovinović, Lovro Nidogon, Patrik Pavić, and Petar Sruk.
Implementation examples are given in attached source code files.

Task Desni klik
Prepared by: Lovro Nidogon
Necessary skills: loops
We need to look at each matrix independently. For each, we have to determine the minimum order number
of a row with the character #, and the maximum order number of such row. We can do that with nested
loops and helper variables with the currently minimum and maximum order number. We try to upadate
the helper variables every time we are on a field with character #. The needed value for each of the
matrices we will get as the difference of the maximum and minimum order number.

Task Čokolade
Prepared by: Vito Anić
Necessary skills: binary search, prefix sums
First, let us observe that the order of chocolates, does not matter, so we can sort them. Equivalent to the
value l − f is to sum the value l − f of every chocolate separately. If we need one chocolate, it would be
optimal to take the most expensive or the cheapest chocolate. The reason why that is the case is described
in the condition of the task:

   • If the chocolate is cheaper than k kunas, Lana will pay full price and therefore she would like to
     take the chocolate with the smallest price possible.
   • If the chocolate is more expensive than k kunas, the value l − f for that chocolate will be equal to
     k − (c − k) = 2k − c. So, the more expensive chocolate is, the better.

With this, we can solve the first partial. If we split the chocolates into two categories (c ≤ k and c > k),
we can iterate over the number of cheaper chocolates. If Lana takes x chocolates cheaper than k (first x
chocolates in the sorted sequence), she will take m − x expensive (last m − x chocolates). Time complexity
is O(nq).
Let us look at this example: Consider a query with k = 7 and m = 4.




Four numbers are larger than 7, and four are smaller. Let us assume that we want to take all four chocolates
smaller than k. Can we make the required value smaller? The answer is yes. If we would instead of the
chocolate that costs 6 kunas (value 6) take the chocolate that costs 20 kunas (value −6), the total value
would be smaller. If we compare the next two possible chocolates from the ends (5 and 15), we can see
that 5 has a value of 5, and 15 has a value of −1, so it is even better to take two of the chocolates from
the right end! With that step, we have reached the best solution (1, 2, 15, 20) (because the values of the
next two chocolates are 2 and 4, so the chocolate with the price 2 has a smaller value than the chocolate
with the price 11). It is enough to binary search the number of chocolates we are taking with the smaller


                                                  1 od 4
       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 1, November 5th 2022                                                                     Editorial


than k for each query with the same check we were making in the paragraph above. For every query that
will be log operations. Total time complexity is O(qlog(n)).

Task Berilij
Prepared by: Petar Sruk
Necessary skills: ad-hoc, graph theory, ternary search
Let’s define graph G with vertices representing spaceships and edges representing the condition of two
spaceships touching externaly. Additionaly, let the weight of edges be the distance between the circles it
connects. Now the task is equivalent with finding non-negative values for the vertices such that for each
edge the sum of values of both vertices it connects is equal to the weight of that edge, for which the sum
of squares of values of vertices is the least possible. If the vertices (i, j) are connected with the edge of
weight wi,j then for the values of vertices the conditions vi ≥ 0, vj ≥ 0 i vi + vj = wi,j hold.
In the first subtask graph G is an odd cycle. Let’s assume that, for now, the value of first vertex is 0.
Since we can calculate the values wi,j for each edge, we can uniquely determine the value of the second
vertex in a cycle. Now that we know the value of the second vertex we can uniquely determine the value
of the third, and so on untill we circle back to the first vertex with the condition that it’s value should be
a. Let’s now attempt to increase the value of the first vertex by x. To keep the conditions satisfied we
now need to decrease the value of the second vertex, and after that increase the value of the third vertex,
and so on untill we circle back to first vertex with the new condition that it’s value must be a − x. Since
x = a − x we can determine x uniquely as x = a2 . Now we only need to check if substituting a2 as the
value of the first vertex yields non-negative values for all other vertices.
In the third subtask the graph is a forest, but it is enough to solve it for each tree separately. Let’s pick
any vertex as a root and denote it’s value as x. To satisfy the conditions of the task we can now uniquely
determine the value of each vertex i as a linear polynomial ±x + ci , where ci is a constant with value equal
to alternating sum of weights of edges from vertix i to the root. Since every value must be non-negative,
vertices with values of x + ci set lower bound for x, while vertices with values of −x + ci set upper bound
for x. If upper bound is lesser than lower bound there are no solutions. To determine the x for which the
sum of squares of values of vertices is the least possible let’s sum the squares of linear polynomials for
each vertex. The result is a quadratic polynomial ax2 + bx + c. Notice that a is equal to the size of the
                                                             b
tree so the quadratic polynomial has a minimum at x = − 2a      . Since c is not used in this expression and b
is equal to the sum of −2si ci for each vertex where si is the sign in front of x in polynomial ±x + ci , we
                  b                                           b
can calculate − 2a  without squaring any numbers. if x = − 2a     is between lower and upper bound, x is our
                                                                                             b
solution, else for x we take the value of lower or upper bound whichever is closer to − 2a     .
For full solution let’s solve the task for each component on any spanning tree as in solution for subtask three.
Now we only need to analyse cycles. Let’s note that in the solution of third subtask the polynomial for each
vertex on even depth from the root is x + ci , while for every vertex with odd depth it’s −x + ci . Since even
cycles connect vertices of different depth parity, they only add conditions of form (+x+ci )+(−x+cj ) = wi,j ,
in other words ci + cj = wi,j . ci and cj are constants so it is easy to check if this condition is met. Odd
cycles connect vertices of same depth parity and add conditions of forms (±x + ci ) + (±x + cj ) = wi,j , in
other words ±x = 12 (wi,j − ci − cj ) which gives us only one solution for x as in subtask one.
The time complexity of desribed algorithm is O(n+m). Alternatively, the task could be solved with better
implementations of ternary search with complexity O((n + m)log(C−1 )), where C is maximal absolute
value of coordinates C = 104 and  is the required precision.

Task Iksevi
Prepared by: Dorijan Lendvaj
Necessary skills: number theory, sieve of eratosthenes
We can ignore the left and bottom wall, which allows us to consider points with negative coordinates


                                                    2 od 4
       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 1, November 5th 2022                                                                         Editorial


without changing the answer. That way, every point which is on a tile’s corner is some tile’s top corner,
some tile’s left corner, some tile’s bottom corner and some tile’s right corner. Without loss of generality,
let’s consider the points which are some tile’s top corner. Let’s divide the tiles into even and odd rows. If
the length of the diagonal in millimeters is 2k where k is a natural number, the center of the tiles in even
rows is in points (2ak, 2bk) for all integers a and b, so their top corner is in points (2ak, (2b + 1)k) for all
integers a and b. The center of the tiles in odd rows is then in points ((2a + 1)k, (2b + 1)k) for all integers
a and b, so their top corner is in points ((2a + 1)k, (2b + 2)k) for all integers a and b.
For the first subtask, it’s enough to precompute all possible tiles’ top corner by considering all possibilities
of a, b and k, and for each query we can easily answer how many times that point was a top corner.
For the second subtask, notice that the conditions written in the first paragraph require either x to be
equal to k multiplied by an odd number and y to be equal to k multiplied by an even number, or for
x to be equal to k multiplied by an even number and y to be equal to k multiplied by an odd number.
From there we can easily see that x and y must be divisible by k, so we can solve the second subtask by
checking the condition for all k which are divisors of both x and y, i.e. all k which are divisors of gcd(x, y).
For the third subtask, call the GCD of x and y g. A necessary condition for a fixed k can be further
simplified to k being a divisor of g and xk and ky having a different parity. Let kg = h, xg = x0 and yg = y 0 .
Then h is a divisor of g, xk = hx0 and ky = hy 0 . If x0 i y 0 have the same parity, multiplying them with the
same number isn’t going to change that, so the answer is 0. If they don’t, then multiplying them with the
same even number will change that(both will become even), and multiplying them with the same odd
number won’t(both of their parities will remain unchanged). Therefore, we want to find the number of
natural numbers h which are divisors of g and which are odd, which is the number of odd divisors of g.
Before answering the queries, we can use Eratosthenes’s sieve to precompute the number of odd divisors
of all number between 1 and 107 to easily answer all the queries.

Task Neboderi
Prepared by: Patrick Pavić
Necessary skills: Euclid’s algorithm, prefix sums
The first subtask is solvable with brute force, by trying out each possible interval. There are O(n2 ) such
intervals, and by naively calculating the sum in O(n) and the greatest common divisor in O(n ln M AX),
where M AX is the largest height of a skyscaper, it is possible to achieve a complexity of O(n3 ln M AX)
which is enough to solve this subtask.
Let the function S(l, r) := hl + hl+1 + · · · + hr be the sum of heights of all skyscrapers inside an interval,
and let gcd(l, r) := G(hl , hl+1 , . . . , hr ) be their greatest common divisor. Notice that the beauty of an
interval [l, r] is exactly S(l, r) · G(l, r). For the solution of the second subtask, notice the following relations:
S(l, r) = S(l, r − 1) + hr and G(l, r) = gcd(G(l, r − 1), hr ). By that relation it is possible to calculate all
values of the functions S and G in complexities O(n2 ) and O(n2 ln M AX) respectively. That is enough
to solve the second subtask.
For the full solution, you should notice the following. For the function S, the following also holds for l > 1,
S(l, r) = S(r, 1) − S(l − 1, 1). It is enoguh to calculate all values of S(1, r) in O(n) and that is enough to
be able to calculate te value of all S(l, r) in O(1). Let us know fix the right border r of the interval we
will look at. Notice the following holds for each l < r: G(l, r) = G(l + 1, r), or G(l, r) | G(l + 1, r) which
implies 2G(l, r) ≤ G(l + 1, r). Now notice that the function G(l, r) can achieve at most log M AX different
values for a fixed r.
Now, notice that for a fixed l, G(l, r) = G(l + 1, r) implies G(l, r + 1) = G(l + 1, r + 1). It follows that
it is enough to maintain the leftmost l which achieves each possible value of G for the current border r.
Because there are at most O(log M AX) of them, it is possible to iterate through all of them and calculate
their beauties. When switching the right border from r to r + 1, it is enough to try and add the border
r + 1 for the interval [r + 1, r + 1], and check for each of the current left borders whether the inequality



                                                      3 od 4
       Croatian Open Competition in Informatics
       Round 1, November 5th 2022                                                                    Editorial


G(l, r) > G(l − 1, r) still holds for G(l, r + 1) > G(l − 1, r + 1). This can be done using Eucild’s algorithm.
This gives us an algorithm of the complexity O(n log M AX ln M AX) which is enough for full score.
Notice that there exist similar algorithms with the same complexity which have a far worse constant. Such
implementation were supposed to get points on the third and fourth subtask.




                                                   4 od 4
