                                                                                                 Day 1
                                                                                            Task: light
                                                                                         Language: en


A Light Inconvenience (light)

The Scientific Committee is relaxing at the opening ceremony of this year’s ceoi. The tasks are prepared,
the grading server’s 1012 firewalls are finally up, and the committee is looking forward to an amazing
show with flaming torches. Nothing can go wrong. Except… no one bought enough oil for those
torches! Now the committee needs help to run the show without using up their oil supplies.
During the show, there will be performers standing in a line, numbered from left to right starting at 1.
The number of performers will vary over time. Each performer holds a torch which may or may not be
on fire at any point in time. Initially, there is only one performer whose torch is on fire.
The show is divided into 𝑄 acts. At the beginning of act 𝑎, either 𝑝𝑎 > 0 performers decide to join the
line on the right, or the rightmost 𝑝𝑎 > 0 performers decide to leave. This is out of the committee’s
control. The leftmost performer always remains on stage. The torches of joining performers are not
on fire, and leaving performers extinguish their torches if they are on fire.
As soon as the line of performers for act 𝑎 is ready, the committee has to announce a number 𝑡𝑎 ≥ 0.
Then, each performer whose torch is on fire shares their fire with the 𝑡𝑎 performers on their right. This
means that the torch of performer 𝑖 will be on fire afterwards if and only if the torch of at least one of
the performers max {𝑖 − 𝑡𝑎 , 1}, … , 𝑖 was on fire beforehand. For a more dynamic show, 𝑡𝑎 must not be
larger than 5𝑝𝑎 , and should be as low as possible (see the grading section below).
At the end of each act, the committee has to tell every performer whose torch is currently on fire
whether to extinguish it or not. For aesthetic reasons, the torch of the rightmost performer should
always be on fire after that. Moreover, to conserve oil, the number of torches left on fire must not be
larger than 150.
Write a program that tells the committee how to run the show within these constraints.


Communication

This is a communication task. You must implement the following three functions:
      void prepare( ) is called in the beginning. You can use this function for setup (or do nothing).
      pair⟨long long, vector⟨long long⟩⟩ join(long long 𝑝𝑎 ) is called when 𝑝𝑎 > 0 performers join the
      line on the right. This function must return a pair that consists of the number 𝑡𝑎 announced by
      the committee and the list of those performers whose torches should be on fire at the end of
      the act. This list must be in strictly increasing order.
      pair⟨long long, vector⟨long long⟩⟩ leave(long long 𝑝𝑎 ) is called when the rightmost 𝑝𝑎 > 0 per-
      formers leave the line. Again, it must return a pair that consists of the number 𝑡𝑎 announced by
      the committee and the list of those performers whose torches should be on fire at the end of
      the act, in strictly increasing order.
If any of your return values does not satisfy the above constraints, your program will be immediately
terminated and judged as Not correct for the respective testcase. You must not write to standard
output or read from standard input; otherwise, you may receive the verdict Security violation!. You
are however free to write to the standard error stream (stderr).
You must include the file light.h in your source code. To test your program locally, you can link it
with sample_grader.cpp, which can be found in the attachment for this task in cms. See below for
a description of the sample grader, and see sample_grader.cpp for instructions on how to run it
with your program. The attachment also contains a sample implementation as light_sample.cpp.




                                                  1/3
                                                                                                       Day 1
                                                                                                  Task: light
                                                                                               Language: en


Constraints and grading

Let 𝑁 denote the maximum number of performers who are simultaneously standing in the line at any
time. In all testcases, 𝑁 ≤ 1017 and 1 ≤ 𝑄 ≤ 50 000.
Subtask 1 (5 points).       There is only one call to leave per testcase.
Subtask 2 (5 points).       𝑁 ≤ 700
Subtask 3 (10 points). 𝑁 ≤ 5 000
Subtask 4 (5 points).       𝑁 ≤ 25 000
Subtask 5 (10 points). 𝑁 ≤ 100 000
Subtask 6 (5 points).       𝑁 ≤ 500 000
Subtask 7 (60 points). No further constraints.
Partial scoring. In Subtask 7, your actual score depends on the maximum value of 𝑡𝑎 /𝑝𝑎 over all acts
𝑎 according to the following table:
                                      max 𝑡𝑎 /𝑝𝑎   [0, 1]    (1, 2]   (2, 3]   (3, 5]
                                          score     60        35       20       10
In particular, to get full score all return values of join and leave must satisfy 𝑡𝑎 ≤ 𝑝𝑎 .


Example interaction

Consider a testcase with 𝑄 = 4. Here, an interaction between your program and the grader could look
as follows:
     Call           Return value                                        Explanation
 prepare( )        —                       you’re free to do any setup here (or do nothing)

                                           the ceremony starts with one performer whose torch is on fire



 join(3)                                   three performers join for a total of four performers
                   3, {2, 4}               performer 1 lights the torches of performers 2, 3, and 4;
                                              afterwards, performers 1 and 3 extinguish their torches



 leave(2)                                  the two rightmost performers leave (only two remain)
                   0, {2}                  no new torches are lit; the torch of performer 2 remains on fire



 join(2)                                   two new performers join (for a total of four)
                   3, {2, 4}               performer 2 lights the torches of performers 3 and 4;
                                             performer 3 extinguishes their torch afterwards



 join(3)                                   three new performers join (for a total of seven)
                   3, {2, 4, 7}            first the torches of performers 3, 5, 6, and 7 are lit, then
                                               performers 3, 5, and 6 extinguish their torches again




                                                       2/3
                                                                                                  Day 1
                                                                                             Task: light
                                                                                          Language: en


The above interaction is reproduced by light_sample.cpp on the public testcase.
Note that the above sequence of calls to join and leave would constitute a valid testcase in any of the
subtasks.


Grader

The sample grader first expects on standard input the integer 𝑄. It then writes to standard output a
protocol of all calls to the above three functions.
In the beginning, the grader calls prepare( ). Then it simulates the 𝑄 acts. For each act 𝑎, it expects on
standard input either an integer 𝑝𝑎 > 0, meaning that 𝑝𝑎 performers join the line, or an integer 𝑞𝑎 < 0,
meaning that 𝑝𝑎 ≔ −𝑞𝑎 performers leave the line; it will then call join(𝑝𝑎 ) or leave(𝑝𝑎 ), respectively.
Upon termination, it writes one of the following messages to standard output:
Invalid input. The input to the grader via standard input was not of the above form.
The stage is empty. There is less than one performer left.
Invalid return value. The return value 𝑡𝑎 does not satisfy 0 ≤ 𝑡𝑎 ≤ 5𝑝𝑎 , the list of performers was not
       given in strictly increasing order, or the list of performers contains an integer smaller than 1 or
       larger than the total number of performers on stage.
Too many burning torches. More than 150 torches were on fire after the act.
Rightmost torch not on fire. The rightmost torch was not lit, or it was extinguished.
Not all announced torches have been lit. The torch of at least one of the performers returned by your
      function has not been lit.
Correct: ratio at most f, at most b burning torches. None of the above errors occurred, all calls to
      leave and join satisfied 𝑡𝑎 ≤ 𝑓 ⋅ 𝑝𝑎 (up to rounding errors), and there were at most 𝑏 torches on
      fire after any act.
In contrast, the grader actually used to judge your program will only output Not correct (for any of
the above errors), Security violation!, Partially correct, or Correct. Moreover, the grader is adaptive,
i.e. the number of performers joining or leaving in each act may depend on the behavior of your
program in the current as well as in earlier runs. Both the sample grader and the grader used to judge
your program will terminate your program automatically whenever one of the above errors occurs.


Limits

Time: 1 s
Memory: 512 MiB




                                                   3/3
